so the first thing that i kind of want
to talk a little bit about in terms of
sleep is i don't know if you all know
this but we have a lot of information
about sleep right
so
if we look kind of statistically
this is
this the level of scientific advancement
in the world is at an all-time high at
least
you know most people can sort of assume
that i don't know about the sumerians
and some of these ancient civilizations
that may have gone to space and whatnot
but generally speaking we can assume
that our scientific
our level of understanding
scientifically of sleep is at an
all-time high
we also tend to have access to science
at an unprecedented level right so now
we have for example lots of people like
myself
who understand some degree of science
i.e or clinicians and we show up on
twitch or youtube or whatever like tick
tock instagram whatever and we will like
teach people about the science right so
so not only is like not only do we know
the most about sleep that we've ever
known
but the ability for you to access that
information
is also at an all-time high
so this kind of begs the question
if this is the most we've ever known
about sleep and access to information
about sleep is an all-time time high
why is everyone struggling with sleep
right it's kind of weird like there's
something fundamentally wrong with the
way that we approach sleep
so the first thing that i'm going to
kind of do is like talk a little bit
about what how people approach sleep so
the first thing that happens is someone
says
i have trouble with sleep right so we're
going to actually flash to a subreddit
post that kind of triggered this which
is a great post
dr k i need to sleep help okay dear dr k
i was wondering if you could make a
stream video about topics around sleep
insomnia sleep disorders depression and
sleep reasons why people have difficulty
sleeping etc i believe many peop many
struggle with sleeping especially my
fellow gamers advice is much needed
personal experience i don't allow myself
to sleep even though i'm tired and
exhausted i take a long time to actually
fall asleep i wake up multiple times at
night and the overall sleep experience
does not feel like quality sleep and i
don't feel rested at all when i wake up
i also have a hard time getting out of
bed in the morning i struggle with
depression and ptsd and them seeing a
therapist would love any advice so
beautiful post we get requests like this
all the time people are constantly
asking us about sleep and so the other
thing that tends to happen is if you
look at like people who disseminate
information sleep is a hot topic so a
lot of people are talking about it right
so you'll tend to have i've sort of
noticed that like you'll have experts in
sleep so you'll have some kind of
scientists like probably a phd
who is an expert in sleep or
neuroscience or something like that
right so they really understand the
science and then what they'll tend to do
is they'll offer recommendations so look
at this they'll look at studies and
stuff and they'll say like oh like
there's a study that shows this and like
this is what we understand about the
brain and neuroscience and circadian
rhythms and stuff like that and then
they'll make recommendations
and so despite the fact that their
science is really solid in their
recommendations appear to be really good
we see still seem to have a societal
sleep problem and why is that okay
and so i think the the problem here is
that if you look at a lot of people who
are scientists
they have very little clinical
experience so the majority of people who
are scientists who will offer sleep
recommendations have not worked with
like actual humans around their problems
that's not actually part of their job
right their part their job is to do a
clinical trial where we offer an
intervention we're going to take 10 000
people we're going to split them into a
control group and a normal group and 5
000 people we're going to give let's say
some kind of supplement or herb and 5
000 people we're going to do
give them a sugar pill and what we're
going to detect is that on average the
people who take the herb or the
supplement do better than the people who
take the placebo and so they conclude
that on average this herb or supplement
results in like an improvement in sleep
but let's remember that out of those 5
000 people let's say 2 000 people got
better with the placebo and 3 000 people
got better with the herb
let's remember for a moment that like 2
000 people got better with the placebo
and 2 000 people didn't get better at
all
so really all you're talking about is a
thousand people in the middle that got
better from the the herb right so if you
really think about it
only 20 percent the the effect size or
what's called the number needed to treat
for your medication is like you have to
treat five people on average to get
actually that may be the incorrect
calculation but
there's this concept of number needed to
treat where when we look at science we
look at populations and what we end up
with is sort of like even though this
study is successful and someone can say
very scientifically that this works
better than placebo there's actually
like 4 000 people in that study who did
not benefit from it and this is the way
that science proceeds right so then
we'll do clinical trials on for example
cbt for insomnia cognitive behavioral
therapy for insomnia and that appears to
work for sleep people will develop apps
and study like these kinds of things and
we study yoga and we study this and we
study that and we study this kind of
thing and we found this kind of
correlation and so all of our science
sort of is like very generalized and
looking at populations and so this is
the reason why people have difficulty
sleeping because the question is if you
are having difficulty sleeping should
you adjust your diet because there's a
study that shows that diet is helpful
for sleep should you take this
particular supplement because there's
studies that shows that this is helpful
for sleep should you see a psychologist
and do cognitive behavioral therapy for
insomnia because the study shows that
that works
and there's no specificity of
recommendations right so this is the
downside of that i've sort of noticed
right i'm not trying to criticize anyone
i think they're offering good
information but when it comes to why we
have so much information about all the
stuff that's effective for sleep when it
translates to an actual human being or
you it doesn't seem to translate very
well right
and that there's a good reason for that
and that's because the scientists tend
not to be clinicians
on the flip side we have clinicians
right so we have medical doctors we may
have psychologists that work with people
individuals and then they'll sort of
make recommendations do cbt things like
that and if we have all these clinicians
why is it sleep cured like don't we have
all these people who are on the front
lines like clinicians like myself that
are working with people every day and
and
shouldn't that fix it and this is the
problem is that clinicians tend to be
taught pathology right so if you go to a
medical doctor and you say i have
trouble with sleep what they will do is
try to diagnose you with something and
if there's something pathological that
they can fix they'll help you right so
if you have sleep apnea for example they
will give you a cpap machine a con a
continuous positive airway pressure
machine that prevents you from becoming
apnic and then you're you'll be fine so
if you're in the ten percent of the
population that has a clear diagnosis
i.e something is really busted with you
they'll they may be able to fix that so
other examples of this could be like
hyperthyroidism for example so it leads
to insomnia so if your thyroid is out of
whack or you have sleep apnea a medical
doctor can fix that but medical doctors
are individualized and pathology focused
and and phds or scientists tend to be
like understanding the science but can't
tailor their recommendations to an
individual person because they're not
like really diagnosticians right they're
not clinicians they're not taught in
that skill and this is the basic problem
that i see with sleep
is that we have a bunch of information
but all of the people who can
individualize your recommendations are
focusing on pathology and all of the
people who have access to the really
high quality scientific information that
is not pathological in nature i.e
supplements herbs things like that don't
really have a very solid training in in
like diagnostics and sort of teasing
apart what is going on with an
individual which is why we get these
super generic recommendations right so
you'll get like these these like people
that go on podcasts and stuff and
there's nothing against them and they'll
say okay here are five things you can do
for your sleep there's data to support
all five of these things and then like
you'd think that if those actually
worked then like sleep would be cured
for everyone right like those five
things like it every problem would be
solved but the truth is the problem
isn't solved and why is that it's
because there's a lack of diagnostic
specificity okay
y'all with me there so let's start with
this
okay
okay so here's how we're gonna approach
this and this is why it's gonna be
complicated all right chat
so what we're gonna do
okay there we go there we go
okay
so let's start from the top
okay why is sleep a problem
so remember kind of like i said so we've
got phds over here
and they're really good at the science
right but they don't know how to provide
personalized recommendations
this could also be
um i mean maybe some of them do i don't
know that maybe that's a little bit
unfair actually and i think about it the
problem is that on a podcast you're not
going to get a personalized
recommendation right on a youtube video
you're not going to get a personalized
recommendation unless it's dr k which
we'll get to in a second
um so then then we've got mds over here
that are really good at personalized
stuff but what we're really trained in
is pathology
and so the fact that like our whole
society has insomnia and difficulty
sleeping
has to do with the fact that like this
is where we're getting their our
information so what's kind of in the
middle here and this is what i think is
like really really missing from western
science and what i really appreciate
about my eastern education is like
basics of how sleep works
so what we're going to start with today
is like understand like how does sleep
work and so an industry that has done a
really good job of this
that is like for example the fitness
industry or like the bodybuilding
industry right so like what's happened
in this industry you have a lot of
people walking around who like are in
shape and they know how to get get
in shape they're healthy they're they're
fit and why is that it's because there's
a lot of like basic information about
how to get physically healthy in terms
of like building muscle mass and working
out and stuff like that there's a lot of
information about the basics of fitness
that is not coming from phds and not
coming from mds like if you go to a
doctor's office and you say can you help
me get in shape like it's a basic
function of the human body like the
doctor is going to be like
kind of but not really right they can
assess you for diabetes and maybe start
you on anti-diabetes medication maybe
they can like give you an inhaler if
you've got asthma they can focus on the
pathology but they're not going to like
help you figure out how to work out
right
and then on the flip side you've got
phds that you know they'll give you good
information too they'll say you can use
this supplement
and then you'll build muscle mass better
there's this kind of thing that you can
do there's this kind of thing that you
can do but once again they're not going
to give you personalized recommendations
they're not going to give you like a
workout plan right because that's
something that a personal trainer does
so the main thing that i think is really
missing is like the basics of like how
sleep works
so where does insomnia actually come
from right like why do people have
difficulty sleeping what are the factors
that lead to people like
what makes it easy for you to sleep what
does your body and physiology and brain
rely on to go to sleep how does your
body know when you should go to sleep
what are the signals that make you
sleepy what are the signals that keep
you awake and these kinds of fundamental
things
because we don't understand them we
can't tailor our treatment to them
because we don't like we just treat
insomnia like one word okay so let's
start by looking at insomnia and
unpacking it
because there are three there are
different problems when it comes to i
have trouble sleeping so the first
problem that we have is a lack of
specificity with our jargon
so if we talk to people who have
insomnia
what we find is they're people who have
trouble falling asleep
okay
this is completely different so the
mechanisms of falling asleep are
completely different from the mechanisms
of staying asleep
right so some people like and i know it
sounds kind of weird but you guys get
that falling asleep like if i have
narcolepsy i have no problem staying
asleep like the problem is that i fall
asleep way too easily completely
different paths so both of these people
will say i get bad sleep but there's no
specificity in terms of like what's your
problem do you have a problem falling
asleep or staying asleep because as
we'll get into there are different
mechanisms and if this is your problem
your solutions are going to be different
than if this is your problem okay
so next thing is that people have
difficulty waking up
and this too is another like it's a
completely different thing right i have
no problem falling asleep i have no
problem staying asleep i have probably
uh some problem waking up and so people
will say my sleep sucks well why is it
well it's because i heart it's hard for
me to wake up in the morning and i feel
tired in the morning well okay so then
that's you guys get how that's like a
completely different thing than like
like someone who has anxiety
who is awake for three hours like
worrying about tomorrow that person's
solution is going to be completely
different from the person who can fall
asleep on time and just has a lot of
trouble waking up in the morning now the
two may be related because if you sleep
three hours late then you're gonna have
trouble waking up at 7am because you
fell asleep late so i can we cannot
understand why things get tangled but
let's start by understanding there are
different mechanisms at play when it
comes to insomnia
the the next thing that i'm going to say
is i'm tired during the day
or in the morning
so
you might ask what does that have to do
with kind of insomnia right so if i ask
people
how do you know that your sleep is bad
if i start with that question
what most people will do is they'll say
well i feel tired in the morning or
during the day
so this is the tricky thing about sleep
so there's a huge problem with sleep
misperception
there's a ton of data that shows that
human beings are very very bad at
judging their sleep
and why is that is because you're not
conscious
so people will say for example that i've
only slept three hours last night people
say that kind of crap all the time how
do they know they only slept three hours
do you guys realize if you only slept
three hours a night like how torturous
it would be to be like bored for five
hours in the middle of the night like
doing absolutely nothing
it's so bad like sleep misperception is
like a huge problem so this is another
interesting thing right so like there's
a fantastic medication called
a clever medication i should say
so there's a there's a medication called
zolpidem which is also known as the
trade name in the u.s is called ambien
and like this is like a wonder drug for
sleep
so if you look at the clinical trials
for an ambient or zolpidem essentially
what it does is increases it only
improves sleep by 30 minutes
that's all it does it gives people 30
more minutes of sleep
okay that's it
and people think it it cures their
insomnia and why is that is because it
targets misperception
so the real thing that's opened and
assaulted it only increases their sleep
by 30 minutes it gives you half an hour
extra sleep but what it really helps
people do is fall asleep
and it gives them the perception
that they slept well
this is really what it improves
but the actual amount of sleep that you
get from an ambient result is very low
right
and so like it alters sleep
misperception
so if we kind of look at insomnia and we
try to ask people the question okay like
why do you think you are having bad
sleep the first thing we need to
understand is that misperception is a
huge problem and people tend to like
poorly diagnose like their own sleeping
problems and that sort of makes sense
because
you're not conscious right so you don't
really know what's going on during sleep
and so what people will do is they will
reverse engineer their sleeping
diagnosis
based on what they are aware of which is
like tiredness during the day right
and so this is another reason why for
example sleep apnea is so difficult to
diagnose
because sleep apnea is like this period
of time where you stop breathing during
sleep and it happens like 10 times a
night 30 times a night things like that
and people don't realize they never
realize all they know is that they're
tired during the day and by the way 10
of the population has sleep apnea so
then what happens is you go to a sleep
study and then like you measure your
ethnic episodes you sleep in a
laboratory where you're being constantly
monitored they monitor every single
breath that you take over the course of
the night and then they diagnose you
with sleep apnea
okay
so when we talk about insomnia we're
talking about a number of discrete
processes
and what people tend to do is they like
believe that
you know they have difficulty sleeping
because of like poor data from the next
day or they are aware of some of these
things like people are aware of this
stuff right so if i wake up or i'm
tossing and turning all night i have a
vague sense
of what tossing and turning all night is
but what we'll really discover is it's
not really all night
so just take a step back from that
but these are kind of three discreet
things that are four discrete things
that people will say when they say i
have trouble my sleep sucks okay
so the first thing that we have to try
to do is sort of recognize that there
are four discrete things that have four
discrete processes which we'll have in
turn four discrete solutions
okay
next thing is
let's think a little bit about so if we
want to understand what are the
components of sleep
if we want to understand how to tackle
these problems we have to understand
like what sleep is
why we sleep and like how the body knows
how to fall asleep okay
so
why is this important so like i want you
all to just think about this for a
second right so if we want to optimize
something in our body
we have to understand like how it works
and why it has evolved the way that it
has and once we understand like what how
the body works
then we can start to make very targeted
changes to optimize things in the
direction that we want to so once again
i'm going to use a fitness analogy right
so once we understand okay the body
craves carbohydrates because they're
calorie dense
and back when we evolved like there were
survival benefits to eating calorie
dense food okay now that i understand
this basic principle i understand like
what i need to alter in order to like
work in line with my body so i'm gonna
need to eat like complex carbohydrates
that in higher fiber diets to help me
feel full
and if i eat high fiber foods that help
me feel full it will counteract some of
the caloric craving that i have so we
can start to leverage our understanding
of like biology and physiology and diet
and fitness to optimize our physical
health no one does this with sleep right
like no one explains like what are the
basics of like why we sleep okay
so let's go over the basics of why we
sleep and once we understand like why we
sleep and how we sleep we'll start to
see where these four problems arise okay
so the first thing to understand is that
sleep is really really important
and it's highly adaptable
this is why it's such a problem so if we
look at for example your heartbeat okay
or your respiratory rate your heartbeat
and your respiratory rate are not like
that adaptable so the goal of the heart
is to continuously pump blood like all
the time we don't need to adapt it it's
not like we want to stop pumping blood
for a couple hours and then like pump
extra blood later like sure you can
increase your heart rate from let's say
you have a resting heart rate of like
70. you can go up to like 110 or 120
push come to shop but you're never gonna
go up to a thousand like you'll die if
you do that and you're never gonna drop
down to like 20 right like if you do
then you're bradycardic and you can have
all kinds of problems
sleep is a little bit different though
so if we think about you know let's say
i'm walking around in the jungle
and i see a tiger
and then like
i want to be able to control my sleep
right so like if a tiger finds me at two
in the morning i need the ability to
like stay awake
despite the fact that i'm tired
otherwise i'll get eaten and similarly
like i i need to be able to adjust my
sleep schedule i need to be able to stay
up all night like let's say i'm a woman
giving birth
and if i'm in the middle of the labor
process and it's midnight it's not like
my body's like okay well now that it's
midnight let me shut off let me just go
to sleep and just pause the labor
problem no like you need to stay up all
night and like finish the process of
labor right so there are all kinds of
situations which sleep needs to be
highly adaptable and this is why it
changes so easily right it's really easy
to screw up your sleep schedule because
sleep by nature is highly adaptable our
body is designed to be able to adjust
our sleep schedule based on our needs so
other good examples of this are like jet
lag right so our body doesn't have a
fixed clock our body has a clock that
adapts to things like sunlight
this will become really really important
later so that's how like you know we
start off jet lag when our internal
circadian rhythm is out of proportion to
day time and night time but our body
fundamentally a lot of its triggers and
cues about when we should sleep and when
we should be awake have to do with like
light and darkness right and so this has
to do with like this has even been
evolved over like you know farming and
stuff like that like humans tend to be
more awake at certain times of the day
less awake at other times a day it's all
biological in nature but it's it's
adaptable
so
um
so here's kind of what what i'm gonna do
i'm gonna draw something
okay so this is like our sleep so this
is like
so this is our this is let's say a night
of sleep
and then if you have problems falling
asleep there's like an obstacle here so
our body has a very natural tendency to
start at point a and go to point z right
that's what it wants to do it wants to
sleep for eight hours a day and it's got
like a
this is a natural
tendency towards stuff
and then there are some kinds of
problems that can cause an obstacle to
our body's desire to sleep so this is
falling asleep
so we'll talk about what these factors
are
and then they're staying asleep
so there are things that will disrupt us
in the middle of our sleep and then
there's even like waking up
right so like there are difficulties
with waking up where our body naturally
wants to end the sleep it's not like you
have to
turn stop sleeping
intentionally right after you sleep for
a while your body's like we're done time
to wake up so there are natural
mechanisms that involve waking up their
natural mechanisms that involve staying
asleep in their natural mechanisms that
involve falling asleep and if we
understand what those are we will start
to gain power over these different
problems okay now just to kind of point
out like this is the problem with sort
of like the sleep wellness industry for
lack of a better term
is that what does the sleep wellness
industry do it just like drives stuff
this way it's like here take this
supplement
here take this herb
here use this app
it has no
cognizance
of like these different physiologic
neuroscientific mechanisms they're just
like hey do this thing
hey do cbt for sleep
and i'm not saying that this stuff isn't
effective i'm just saying it's just like
you're just adding crap into this this
like cycle which is going to cause
problems so medical doctors are guilty
of this too oh i'm having trouble with
insomnia if i'm a psychiatrist i'm like
here take some trazadone
or here pop an ambien
and i'm not really addressing the
underlying mechanisms with any
specificity so come this morning i am
tired
why because i have this crap floating in
my system
right
so like trazado like floats around and
gives people a sense of daytime
tiredness
and this is the next problem with sleep
is that all the things that we do over
here
that allow us to basically overcome and
ignore all of these factors create side
effects in the morning
so i'll hit on this again
but so what are the solutions that
people use we use substances right
whether it's a whether it's a chemical
like whether it's a prescribed drug or a
supplement or whatever we just decide
like instead of fixing any of this crap
in the middle
what we're just gonna do is like i'm
gonna pop a pill i'm gonna take a
supplement i'm gonna take a little i'm
gonna take me some magnesium right
because sometimes that helps with
insomnia i'm gonna take me some valerian
root or some apogenin or like some
kavakava or like there's all kinds of
stuff out there right i mean just take
me some of this stuff
and then instead of fixing the problem
we have that stuff floating around in
our system and then we're tired the next
day this is also true of marijuana right
so like people say oh i use marijuana to
help me sleep because i can't sleep
without it well then what happens like
the next morning so marijuana does
different things so it affects so we
have you know
our sleep cycles
right so we've got like you know
different phases of sleep and then we
have rem sleep
and basically early on in the night
we'll have like a lot of let's say phase
one to two sleep and then you know this
is let's say phase three to four and
then we've got some rem sleep over here
so let's say here's like
early night and then as the night goes
on we've got sleep uh phase one to two
and then we enter phase three to four
i'm a little bit rusty on this and then
we have more rem sleep
right so we have different phases of
sleep so our our brain does different
things and so hour one of sleep looks
like this
and hour seven of sleep looks like this
so that the the natural change our sleep
cycle like evolves over the course of
the night
and what that means is if i use
marijuana or alcohol like if i drink
alcohol i will pass out right so alcohol
will overcome this step no problem
marijuana will overcome the step of
falling asleep the problem is then it
messes with this stuff and we get like
non-restful sleep
and we even talk about it in our lingo
right we say okay i drink alcohol to
help me pass out
it's not a natural falling asleep
process it's bypassing this step
artificially with chemicals which
results in a an alteration so like when
you drink alcohol for example it
decreases the amount of rem sleep that
you have it decreases the amount of late
stage sleep that you have and so you
result in non-restful sleep and then you
wake up in the morning
tired
and then what do you do
right so if you use pot or alcohol to
sleep at night what do you do then you
drink coffee
stimulants
right
and then once i start pounding the
coffee
when nighttime comes around i have
trouble falling asleep because i've got
this artificial stimulant floating
around in my system preventing me from
sleeping
and then what do i do
right so
can't fall asleep
oh yeah marijuana sweet
marijuana
poor quality sleep
wake up tired
coffee and this is the cycle
and so then people are kind of screwed
because now you have a potentially
marijuana dependence or a caffeine
dependence and without either one you're
kind of like you can't function right
so i this is where like i think if you
want to really conquer sleep
and be good at it you can't just take a
supplement you can't just go to cbt for
insomnia unfortunately like sure those
things can help
like cpap and sleep apnea is the one
thing that i'd say is like or maybe
hyperthyroidism stuff too but there are
definitely things that you can do and
like absolutely like supplements can
help like doing cbt for insomnia can
help there's overwhelming data that does
this but in my experience
so i've helped like
a bunch of people like really just sleep
like babies
and i'd say that in eighty percent of
the people i've done it without a single
damn medication
uh maybe i'll use it at the beginning
because there are other things going on
but for like 80 of people it's about
understanding how sleep happens
and then understanding okay what is the
problem that is interfering with your
sleep and then targeting that thing
specifically because if you use
something else like an herb a supplement
or a medication
that's going to cause side effects
because that's just how like stuff that
you stick in your body works
right like things will create
physiologic changes if you ingest them
okay
so i'm not blaming people who use
substances to help them fall asleep hell
i sometimes prescribe substances to
people to help them fall asleep
including marijuana i've done that
before right but what i'm saying is that
a sustained healthy
way to get restful sleep
comes with like understanding sleep
first
and then targeting what your specific
like problem with sleep is and it feels
just so much better it's just tricky
because no blog post from the sleep
nutrition supplement industry is gonna
explain this stuff right because it's
against their business model like
they're just trying to sell this thing
and i'm not even blaming them because
they can be scientific about it they're
like sleep is a huge problem let me go
look at what science has to offer and
they see oh this herb works let's start
selling this herb which is totally fine
like there's a there's a value to that
but in my experience as a clinician
this stuff is ultimately way more
valuable okay
so next question so now that we
understand the sleep cycle okay so
there's like
we start you know at night time
and then we wake up ideally in the am
there's falling asleep staying asleep
waking up right these are our three
obstacles so let's start with this
okay
how does the body like let's just talk
about sleep for a second how does the
body know like
what how does sleep work so imagine that
i'm an alien
or you're like you have a five-year-old
kid who comes to you and says
you know person can you please tell me
how does the body know like how does the
body know when to go to sleep what do
y'all think what are the factors
that determine when we go to sleep
right okay so good so one person is
saying adenosine
excellent
so
let's talk about adenosine for a second
oh hold on hold on melatonin hold on
hold on
melatonin
exhaustion
darkness
or light very good
okay
temperature
so people are saying stress
excellent a lot of good stuff here
okay so so remember for all the all five
heads out there that are like uh like
endogenous body clock circadian rhythm
like melatonin light sensitivity
remember we're talking to an alien
you're not allowed to use science
because that's not a thing like let's
understand sleep on a basic level what
the does that even mean
no science
tell me like on a basic level
how how does sleep work
how does the body know when i'm supposed
to go to sleep
okay
we'll get to the science don't worry
about it but for now we want to
understand on a very simple level
you're tired
okay
okay so let's talk about a couple of
these things okay so how does the body
know it's tired
right it's okay people are saying
routine
we'll get to these
no it's not low blood sugar see there's
the science again nope happens to be
wrong fatigue that is a synonym for
tired right okay so now here comes the
so like let's just think about this
right so can you sleep for 24 hours a
day
science is coming don't worry chat
but let's start with basics
generally speaking no right so if
there's some kind of illness and we'll
talk about illness at the end
you've done that i'm sure
right so then we'll even talk a little
bit about how you've been able to do
that because generally speak people
don't sleep for 24 hours a day right
generally speak
speaking people will stay awake for
about 16 hours a day
and they'll sleep for about
eight hours a day on average okay so
there may be variations there are
absolutely times where i've slept 20
hours
and so but the the basic idea is that
you know if i wake up at like 10 in the
morning like
it's really hard for me to sleep eight
hours at 3 p.m like for most people you
may be able to do it because your system
is all messed up totally fine or there
could be an illness going on but
generally speaking like our body kind of
wakes up after like somewhere between
like seven and ten hours
right and we get tired pretty naturally
somewhere around 16 hours and so even if
you talk to people who have really super
messed up sleep schedules this tends to
be like pretty consistent maybe it'll be
like 12 to 20.
right so they may stay up for 20 hours
then pass out for 10 and their sleep
like schedule is constantly like
changing so one day i'm gonna wake up at
10 a.m and the next day i wake up at
noon
and the next day i wake up at 2 p.m
and then i'm going to sleep at like
let's say 4 in the morning
and the next day i wake up go to sleep
at 6 in the morning
next day i go to sleep at six in the
morning
right like but if you talk to people
this is what you'll see there'll be
still be some degree of consistency
okay
so the the general thing to understand
is that our body and this is where
science comes in so now we're gonna uh
you know unlock the science so like
we're just gonna simplify things with
adenosine
so basically as we are awake our body
our brain builds up this chemical called
adenosine which is a waste product
product it's kind of this is an
oversimplification that's not really
true in some ways but
um you know comes from atp because we
recycle atp and stuff all the time
uh and so atp is our major um
energy source which stands for adenosine
triphosphate right so we've got a couple
of phosphates on there each time we bust
off a phosphate fate we release energy
so oh yeah look at that some of that
sweet sweet energy
that comes out right and so this is like
where our body gets energy is we take an
adenosine triphosphate we turn it into
adenosine diphosphate and we get some
energy in the process so as we are awake
and active we're going to be building up
adenosine
and then as we sleep and rest we're
going to decrease adenosine
okay
so this is just a broad corollary that
i'm drawing but there are other
metabolic waste products so over the
course of like let's say a 24-hour day
oh god my handwriting's so bad
this is something you all got gotta
understand okay we're gonna have waste
products that build up for the first 16
hours
so these are metabolic waste products
right like adenosine
and then when we sleep
we're going to go ahead and kind of
bring those back down right so
and
so then at the end when we wake up over
here we're like back to
our baseline right so zero waste
okay now when people don't get good
sleep what we'll end up doing is you may
sleep so for example if you have a
problem with your sleep like let's say
you use like marijuana or alcohol what
you'll end up with is this even though
you're sleeping eight hours
the quality of your sleep in terms of
and i also don't know if this is really
metabolic waste products that gets
altered but whatever
crap gets created right so when you wake
up you're actually going to be like
you're going to feel cruddy because
you're like waking up over here
right so this is why like using some
some kinds of supplements or even
medications can be unhealthy y'all with
us so the first thing that we're going
to pay attention to is adenosine or just
like metabolic waste that our body
builds up
how else does our brain know our body
know when it is time to go to sleep
right so this is the use science chads
over here we're going to just talk about
darkness and light right so like our
body has a thing called a circadian
rhythm
and light is a huge huge part of like
our body's physiology of sleeping and
wakefulness so let's step away from
humans because humans are going to get
complicated by all kinds of things but
we can look at other mammals right we
look like monkeys which are genetically
like 99 similar to us they're they have
a heart just like we do they have a
brain just like we do they have you know
lungs just like we do they have kidneys
just like we do and so like you know how
does a monkey's sleep cycle work well it
has a lot to do with light
so when our our
body so our body
adopts a healthy sleep schedule using
light as a signal okay so this is where
melatonin comes in
so when there is light melatonin
production shuts off okay and when there
is darkness
melatonin production goes up
and melatonin melatonin primes us for
sleep okay and then melatonin in turn
helps us sleep
so why is this a problem nowadays so now
what people do is they supplement
melatonin instead of having our body
create it we're going to start taking it
before bed and then melatonin has been
clinically effective to
improve sleep right help people sleep
but why is melatonin being shut off in
the first place why do we need to
supplement it why aren't we getting
enough of our own and it turns out that
blue light
or the wavelength that's emitted by
screens
shuts off melatonin production
so essentially because we're using
screens
we are
we stop melatonin production and so
therefore we're popping a pill
pop a melatonin we try to balance it out
and then hopefully we sleep
so here's something i'm going to tell
you all as a physician okay
nothing that we human beings do to try
to
any any time we try to artificially do
the body's job we're worse at it so i'll
give you guys just an example
so the body has this mechanism of
homeostasis
okay
and homeostasis is like maintaining a
balance so like let's look at
homeostasis of blood pressure for
example
so like our body has all kinds of very
sophisticated mechanisms to keep your
blood pressure at 120 over 80. and then
along comes modern medicine which we
sort of have to do and we'll give people
like anti-hypertensives so people's
blood pressure is too high
so people have hypertension which is
elevated blood pressure
so if my blood pressure is let's say
170 over 100 then
along comes dr k who prescribes you an
anti hypertensive medicine
and what do you guys think the side
effect
of
antihypertensive medicines are
how do these people wind up in the
hospital when i give them
antihypertensives do you all know
what happens when i try to fix their
blood pressure by lowering it
with an ace inhibitor
they pass out
excellent and why do they pass out
because their blood pressure is too low
so instead of winding up at 120 over 80
like they end up at like 100 over 60 and
then they pass out
right so like generally speaking when we
look at popping pills
and administering medicine we do not get
anywhere near the sophistication of what
the human body is able to achieve on its
own
okay
and so this is why we end up with this
crap
because like when you use like let's say
you use a substance
like marijuana or alcohol you're taking
a gigantic hammer to this sophisticated
circuit that is your brain you're just
smacking it over the head and this is
why you pass out right it's even in our
language there's no there's no like
sophistication to it it's just like wham
and then you wake up the next morning
and you're tired because you just took a
hammer to your system and then you need
caffeine and then you feel jittery
right and then you can't fall asleep
it's just it's terrible like trying to
you know it's kind of like i work in
addiction medicine and sometimes people
will speed ball
and the speed ball is when you use
cocaine and heroin at the same time to
balance out each other's effects but i
can tell you that people who use speed
balls are like not
as
good as people who like just let their
body sort of naturally equilibrate to
how they should be feeling okay
right
so
we we will try to supplement stuff which
is fine and then we have like all these
these um you know studies that show that
melatonin helps which is true but let's
start to understand light and darkness
okay
so like our our first thing is
metabolism
so what drives sleep metabolism drives
sleep second thing is light
drive sleep okay what else
drives sleep so we're going to talk
about physiology and now
all of you scientific people get to say
stuff okay so someone said stress
okay so
let's see if people have watched dr k's
guide does anyone remember from dr k's
guide how stress interferes with sleep
who knows the answer
anyone know anyone know
cortisol good and what does cortisol do
how does cortisol mess with sleep
you all remember this is a tough one you
got to know you got to know a little bit
of neuroscience here
increased alertness very good
right so alertness
and
that damn thing the reticular
activating formation
so let's understand this okay bunches of
details and about this in dr k's guide
but we're going to do a quick quick
rundown okay
so
let's try to understand like why why
what did stress used to be when we
evolved so let's say i'm a monkey and
like what does stress look like in my
life right so like i see a predator
there's a snake oh crap there was a
python
on the tree that was next to me
so i'm gonna move away from it and then
i'm gonna i'm gonna sleep at some point
so
when i see the python my my body is
gonna release two chemicals i'm
oversimplifying stuff okay
so i'm gonna release adrenaline which
gives me a short burst of energy like
wakes me the f up and then i'm gonna
release cortisol which has an a uh
appear
a duration of action of four to 24 hours
okay so then my body secretes cortisol
my adrenal glands
and then for the next four to 24 hours i
have this hormone that's gonna float
around in my body and it's a hormone so
it travels through the bloodstream and
affects every single one of my organs by
the way that's what makes it a hormone
is that it affects everything so it's
gonna affect my blood pressure it's
gonna affect my sense of hunger it's
gonna make me feel less hungry it's
gonna affect my immune system it's gonna
affect my liver it's gonna route blood
away from my liver
it is also going to affect this part of
my brain called the reticular activating
formation which is the part of my brain
that helps me sleep
and what does it tell to my reticular
activating formation
what is it it says hey you need to wake
up very very very easily because if we
hear a twig snap it could be the python
if we smell something that smells like a
python i need to be able to wake up so
generally speaking it's hard to wake me
up when i'm sleeping but when cortisol
is floating around in my system it's
very easy to wake up while sleeping oh
interesting dr k are you suggesting for
a moment hold on a second does this mean
that interrupted sleep
may have more to do with stress and
cortisol than let's say waking up in the
morning oh maybe maybe that could be
true maybe they're actually discreet
physiologic and neuroscientific
mechanisms that are responsible for each
of these three things and if we target
each of those mechanisms and understand
what turns them on and then we go back
to the root of how they're being turned
on and then we actually end up turning
them off we will fix your sleep problem
weird right i know it's kind of bizarre
but maybe if you have trouble sleeping
because you're stressed out all the time
dealing with your stress
in
during your waking hours will actually
naturally resolve your sleep problem
it's weird
weird maybe you don't actually need to
take a supplement maybe what you need to
do do is deal with the stress that is
activating your brain and telling it to
not go to sleep
interesting interesting maybe i don't
know though
we'll see
okay so that's just one example so if
you have stress and you have a high
level of cortisol floating around so
here's a good example of modern things
okay so let's say
i'm
failing out of school
right
my future
this is not something that is a
temporary thing so our stress system
evolved to deal with like short-term
threats like python right it's not like
on the 30th of the month the python is
going to show up so i'm dreading it for
the next 29 days
oh my god i got an f on my first test
and for the next three months no matter
how hard i study i can't get an a in the
class my future cortisol level
constantly high
alertness level constantly high
irritable
uh
hunger is all messed up
right digestion is messed up
because remember cortisol reroutes blood
away from your gi system and liver
and my sleep is messed up my future
which you're stressed about every single
day when you go to class or don't go to
class your cortisol level goes up
and then you can't sleep because your
reticular activating formation of
cortisol is like hey
better sleep lightly because we're gonna
get screwed because our system our our
biological machinery cannot
differentiate between a tiger in the
woods and failing out of school like it
just doesn't have the sophistication to
do that
and then what happens is oh my sleep
sucks
let me let me take
let me take this herb and that'll fix it
right
and then you wake up the next day and
you're tired because you've got the herb
floating around in your system gg
okay
so
stress is absolutely a big part of it
the other physiologic hormone by the way
there's a lot more complexity than this
okay i'm just using this to illustrate a
point
the other hormone that we're going to
talk about is insulin so if i were to
ask y'all
what makes you sleepy right because if
we want to understand how to go to sleep
let's start with this okay there's stuff
about metabolism and light and cortisol
and okay so what keeps you awake stress
keeps me awake excellent next question
is what makes you sleepy
excellent this is the right answer a
burrito makes you sleepy
right
no no no
so this is what we call the food coma so
let's understand ourselves like what is
going on with the food coma it's like 2
p.m
i haven't eaten all day
and i have a gigantic burrito because
i'm starving and then it's like
and it's hard to stay awake
and then i drink a cup of coffee to make
it through the end of work
and then nighttime rolls around and i
have difficulty sleeping where did that
all begin it began with the burrito
okay but not just the burrito because
eating a burrito is not the only thing
that correlates with an insulin spike
okay so this is what happens when you
eat food you release a hormone called
insulin insulin is an anabolic hormone
okay what anabolic hormone means is that
it's a hormone that activates like it
tells your body hey it's time to build
stuff so it's time to store away food
it's time to process calories it's time
to build glycogen build fat build muscle
so we're going to go into like building
phase
and when we go into building phase like
we get sleepy because our body does a
lot of tissue repair for example and
building stuff while we sleep so for
example we know that our brain grows
while we sleep we know that muscles grow
while we sleep so if you want to be a
good bodybuilder you need lots and lots
of sleep because that's when your body
like builds stuff right we're inactive
we're not expending energy we're
building things
so anabolic sort of having an anabolic
embolic metabolism or an anabolic mode
will be pro sleep
so what tends to happen is is when we
eat a burrito
we will release insulin
and insulin in turn will make us sleepy
so
in the first couple weeks of medical
school i was super stressed out for
reasons that aren't important and i was
having trouble sleeping so i decided
that i was going to do
something called burrito chemistry
and so what i did
is before i went to bed i would eat a
gigantic burrito
and then i would listen to biochemistry
lectures because biochemistry lectures
were so hard to stay awake during right
so i don't know if you're like me but
biochemistry lectures are like hard for
me to stay awake during and so that
combination would like knock me out
the cool thing
is that like by the next morning my body
has digested the burrito
and it's not like biochemistry lectures
have any side effect if anything maybe i
absorb some biochemistry in my sleep and
so when i wake up the next morning i'm
actually like feeling okay
right there's no herb floating around in
my system there's no tracidone floating
around in my system i like feel pretty
good
so we can actually use physiology
and especially insulin and the kinds of
foods that we eat and when we eat them
and how we eat them to help us go to
sleep
so once again the insulin thing though
is not going to affect us
here
or here the insulin thing will affect us
here so burrito chemistry
targets this
you all get that
stress
reduction
targets the first part too but in
different ways because there's it's not
just one thing stress has multiple
effects on your body right
okay
so
this'll all come together don't worry
about it all right so
um
okay
so this is these are kind of like three
things that we're going to talk a little
bit about metabolism light and
physiology as like mechanisms that will
affect the three dimensions
that we are talking about falling asleep
or four dimensions falling asleep
staying asleep trouble waking up and
feeling tired during the day okay
now so so we can also see that
technology acts here
right um
sleep cycles are going to be sort of
here as well
in terms of like metabolism so what i
mean by that is that you know
like if i wake up at noon it's going to
be hard for me to go to sleep at 9 00
p.m you all get that and that's
essentially like due to our internal
metabolism
okay
so we've talked a little bit about um
we've talked a little bit about these
three dimensions so let's go back to our
diagram and now we're going to start
talking
a couple of other things okay so we're
gonna talk about medical stuff
so here's our sleep diagram so here's
you know
hour zero let's say hour ten
right so we have obstacles to falling
asleep obstacles to staying asleep
obstacles to
um
waking up
okay those are all discreet and we'll
get to solutions in a second
the next thing that we have to talk a
little bit about is illness so
if you have an
illness this line no longer applies what
we're dealing with is a slightly
different line
so like if we think about correcting an
illness there's like something so if we
haven't let's say i'm hyperthyroid okay
what's to happen is
when i'm hyperthyroid
these things are going to be altered by
something fundamental so our like level
of thyroid hormone like creates a
completely different scenario so the
normal things the normal physiologic
stuff may be insufficient so i can even
correct this problem i can do
psychotherapy around my stress and i can
manage like waking up well but if i'm
hyperthyroid all the stuff that would
normally fix my problems may not fix my
problem because there's a underlying
physiological state which is completely
different so for example burrito
chemistry is not going to help me wake
up feeling rested if i have sleep apnea
do you all get that so the thing about
illness is that illness like
fundamentally alters things and then
this has to be fixed in order for the
other stuff to like you know
start working properly do you all get
that so let's talk a little bit about
the conditions that lead to um
altered neurochemistry altered
physiology that just sort of like in
which normal sleep no longer applies
right because everything we've talked
about so far is just like normal sleep
and how it works and what are the
drivers for sleep so the first thing is
mental illness so this is the cool thing
i mean it's not cool but it's
interesting intellectually
so this is an interesting observation
that i made that i'm sure lots of other
people made but i don't know why they
don't teach us this explicitly
so the common denominator for every
psychiatric illness
depression anxiety
psychosis
ocd is impaired sleep
the one symptom
that all people who have a psychiatric
diagnosis that may be a little bit of an
over generalization i'm sure there's
something out there that doesn't apply
um like maladaptive daydreaming or
something but generally speaking if you
look at the common denominator for all
mental illnesses it is impaired sleep
and so this is when i got curious about
sleep and this is by the way how i
developed all this crap because i i
thought to myself i was like oh like
that's kind of interesting i wonder if
if this is the common denominator if i
get really really good at helping people
with their sleep i wonder if like i
would help all of my patients instead of
learning depression treatment anxiety
instead of becoming an expert in
depression treatment an expert in
anxiety treatment an expert in ocd
treatment i wonder if i just become an
expert in sleep can i actually help
everyone that i see and i think the
answer is basically yes so we know that
depression leads to sleep impairment we
know that anxiety leads to sleep
impairment
we know that you know ptsd leads to
sleep impairment okay and the other
really interesting thing uh so other
causes are going to be like
hyperthyroidism so there's all kinds of
causes
right so i i'm not going to cover them
all so for example there's this
condition called
uh
familial
fatal insomnia i've seen one patient
with this it is terrifying
so this is a genetic condition
that is almost like a prion disease
um so you inherit some kind of protein
that later in life prevents you from
sleeping and then you can't sleep like
you literally cannot sleep so some
fundamental circuit in your brain that
lets you fall asleep fails and then you
start to become like psychotic
delusional and eventually you die it's a
terrifying condition
we're not really covering all of the
physiologic causes of sleep because
they're exceedingly rare so we're just
covering the big ones so the top of the
list
is mental illness
hyperthyroidism
sleep apnea
right and there are other things also
acid reflux
there are also circadian rhythm
disorders
so these are things like um shift work
disorder
so these are people who work night
shifts right also medical residents and
doctors uh there's like you know
basically something that is what is it
late shift
i forget the name this is basically like
night owls people have a night owl
circadian rhythm
there's like circadian rhythm like nos
there's a bunch of these diagnoses but
essentially these are diagnoses where we
have an internal biological clock
which tells us when to wake up and when
to go to sleep which by the way is
influenced by all the things that we
already discussed
like light and metabolism that somehow
gets shifted off
and so those are
unique diseases which have their own
treatments
my point is that you know if you have
and the interesting thing is that these
map on to particular areas right so
generally speaking
speaking people with anxiety have
difficulty falling asleep
people with depression suffer from early
morning awakening
so in the case of depression
we see something very interesting which
is even if you go to sleep late like if
i have trouble falling asleep and i go
to sleep at midnight i wake up at 4 00
a.m every day and i feel super depressed
and my mind is racing
right so these discrete processes ptsd
tends to happen here
have difficulty staying asleep why is
that because they have nightmares
right so we even have some medications
like prosocian
um which will stop nightmares and help
pts people with ptsd sleep through the
night so people with ptsd don't
necessarily have troubles falling asleep
or waking up but or they're even if they
have trouble waking up the reason they
have trouble waking up is because their
sleep is disturbed in the middle of the
night right so we can even see amongst
mental illnesses
not all of the insomnia is the same like
there are discrete different
sources of insomnia that particular
mental illnesses will target and damage
which results in these three buckets
so hyperthyroidism for example will have
uh will act here
and here
really
um but we'll see like a lot of times
people will have difficulties falling
asleep if they're hypothyroid sleep
apnea
sort of
is noticed here
but is really a problem over here
okay this is really where sleep apnea
acts
so once again we've got like tons of
evidence that insomnia is not all the
same so if you're listening to your
favorite wellness podcast and they're
like oh this thing helps with sleep like
i think the reason that everyone is
still having sleep problems despite the
fact that we have a thousand wellness
podcast is because i don't hear anyone
talking this specifically about sleep
and that's like why the problem is
persisting fundamentally
so if we have reflux for example reflux
acts here in here
so people can have trouble falling
asleep if they have reflux so just to
understand this a little bit so reflux
is when
you have stomach acid which normally
belongs in the stomach and the stomach
is a high acidic environment so it's
protected against the high acid our
esophagus which is the pipe that
connects our mouth to our stomach
shouldn't have stomach acid in it
stomach acid will damage it
so when we have reflux we have a lazy
valve
or lazy flap that allows acid to leak
from our stomach into our esophagus
then the esophagus starts taking acid
damage every round
as it starts taking acid damage you're
like being injured and it releases all
kinds of inflammatory chemicals bumps up
your cortisol level and causes all kinds
of problems right so re like reflux can
actually cause this as well so this is
the kind of thing where as long as
you've got reflux going on i mean you
can
cut out caffeine all you want to but as
long as you've got that reflux signal
you can deal with your internal worries
about how your life is never going to go
anywhere or whatever you do deal with
all that crap but as long as the reflux
is creating a physiologic like you know
you're sitting in a pool of acid your
esophagus is sitting in a pool of acid
that's going to create a physiologic
effect which will will make it hard for
you to sleep okay
so the key thing here is that different
kinds of illnesses are going to alter
the general trajectory that you're
working with right that's why we call it
a pathology because it changes the game
and so playing a normal strategy of
trying to use burrito chemistry
or you know leveraging like having a
healthy like light
kind of balance
will result in what won't work properly
because there's some other confounding
factor
okay so let's talk a little bit about
solutions for sleep
okay
how we doing so far chat you all doing
we're like one hour in
so we're going to pause we can actually
stop we can do solutions later
okay we can absolutely do recap before
we jump into solutions
let's do a recap excellent excellent
thank you okay
so let's start from the top
okay the first thing
is despite
an increase in the amount of science
and an increase in the dissemination of
scientific information
why is insomnia such a problem so i
believe it is generally a problem
because
scientific studies look at populations
and do not
recommend like individualized
treatments for insomnia right
so like you can have all these general
recommendations do this for sleep do
that for sleep and we're about to get to
those but the key thing to understand is
that insomnia is not
homogeneous it is not one thing it is a
constellation of different things and if
you want to conquer your insomnia what
you need to do is
start to figure out first what kind of
insomnia you have because each one has a
different solution
so we talk about why people have trouble
sleeping or what their perception is
they say my sleep sucks what that means
they could be talking about one of four
things
number one they have difficulty falling
asleep they're staying awake they go to
bed on time they're tossing and turning
and they're not able to fall asleep
number two
even if they do fall asleep they're
tossing and turning all night they wake
up in the middle of the night they don't
feel like they get restful sleep
overnight so when they wake up in the
morning
they feel unrested
number three i have difficulty waking up
so this could be related to number two
or related to number one right if i
toss and turn for two hours and i don't
actually go to sleep on time let's say i
go to bed at 10 p.m and i have to wake
up at 6 a.m but for the first two hours
i'm tossing and turning then i'm gonna
wake up tired or if i do go to bed at 10
at 10 pm but if i'm tossing turning all
night i'm going to wake up feeling tired
some people have difficulty just waking
up even if they do go to bed on time and
even if it does appear that they sleep
pretty well
the fourth reason that people say that
their sleep sucks is because they're
tired during the day or in the morning
okay
and the key thing here
is that if we want to conquer insomnia
we have to know which one is our problem
because each of these involves different
mechanisms and if we fix those
mechanisms we can fix our sleep
okay
so then we got to this
diagram which is sort of like you know
uh okay hold on a second let me actually
right so
the solutions that society tends to
offer us tend to be like instead of
focusing on falling asleep staying
asleep or difficulty waking up and
offering us a tailored solution what we
tend to do is recommend things just
blanket right take this herb
smoke marijuana drink alcohol do cbt for
insomnia take this medication that is
prescribed by a physician
and all of these things don't account
for any of the specificity of what is
causing our sleep problem we're just
taking a huge hammer to the problem
which in turn means that we wake up
tired in the morning because we're not
dealing with the root of the problem
then we enter into this cycle where i
wake up tired so i need marijuana to
fall asleep and then i pass out and then
i get low quality sleep i wake up tired
then i have to drink coffee and since i
drink a bunch of coffee i can't fall
asleep since i can't fall asleep i need
more marijuana
right so we end up in this vicious cycle
where like our solutions become our
problems
so
in order to understand this i think the
the key solution is like let's
understand like how sleep works like
what are the basics of sleep
what helps us fall asleep why do we fall
asleep why do we get sleepy why do we
have difficulty waking up what
determines when we wake up because think
about that for a second it's really
interesting right you don't need
anything to wake you up like if you go
to sleep now
you will wake up at some point right so
there's some internal mechanism that
causes you to wake up what are the
mechanisms that cause you to wake up
what are the mechanisms that cause you
to go to sleep so we talked about a
couple of those
metabolism right so over the course of
the day we build up metabolic waste
products when we go to sleep we clear
those metabolic waste products when we
clear those metabolic waste products we
tend to wake up
okay this is why if you for example if i
have a 36 hour shift as a doctor i'm not
gonna wake up in eight hours i will be
sleep deprived and it'll take my body
longer to clear those metabolic waste
products so instead of sleeping for
eight hours i will sleep for 12 hours
and there are other different things
that you have to make up for the sleep
debt over the next couple of days so
i'll sleep like 10 hours a day for the
next three days instead of sleeping
16 hours at a stretch right so there are
all kinds of complicated mechanisms
which we're not going to go into right
here but
so metabolism is one big reason why we
get tired
and why we wake up light is another huge
reason so our body has been evolved to
be very sensitive to light in terms of
telling us when to go to sleep and when
to wake up so even if we think about jet
lag how does jet lag get corrected think
about that for a second right so i have
a circadian rhythm which wants me to go
to sleep at a particular time and wake
up at a particular time how does the
circadian rhythm adjust how does it know
how to adjust it uses light right so
light is a huge part of our ability to
sleep
third thing is we have all kinds of
physiologic mechanisms which we're just
going to use too just to
illustrate this example one is cortisol
so when we get stressed out
we release cortisol cortisol goes to our
brain and turns on this part of our
brain called the reticular activating
formation which then tells us that we
need to sleep very very lightly or sleep
less because we're in danger and so if
you're in a chronic state of stress your
body is literally going to be telling
you to wake the f up all the time and
sleep very lightly so any kind of noise
will wake you up if you have a high
level of cortisol in your system
so in order to fix that problem you have
to deal with the underlying stress and
then you'll be able to sleep better the
other thing that we talked a little bit
about is insulin so when we eat food
we secrete insulin and when we secrete
insulin it makes us sleepy
okay
so
then we've talked about mental illness
that all of these mechanisms are fine
and good but this is in a normal healthy
functioning human being
if you throw on some kind of mental or
physiologic illness you're playing a
completely different game with a
completely different set of rules so if
you want any of that other stuff to work
you have to move back to the baseline by
treating that illness so that could mean
treating the ptsd could mean treating
depression it could mean getting a sleep
a cpap for for sleep sleep apnea you
know there are all kinds of other stuff
could mean getting your acid reflux
treated you know get get yourself a ppi
and we'll talk about that kind of stuff
which is a proton pump inhibitor which
is a treatment for acid reflux
um
and so that's where we are so far okay
so now we're going to talk about
solutions
so the first thing that you should do
we're going to start with uh let me see
okay let's start with general solutions
and then we'll get to specifics okay
first thing you should do is get a
medical evaluation
and why should you start with this
you should start with this because if
any of these things is going on and
you're not aware of it like the rest of
the stuff may not work right this could
be a really simple fix if there's
actually some kind of pathology going on
like if you can correct your thyroid
level and like easy done finished right
so this may be the biggest bang for your
buck
okay
next thing you should do
is diagnose your sleeping problem
and i don't mean like
give yourself a medical diagnosis
so maybe isolate is a better word
so this is where you can use something
like a sleep diary and try to figure out
okay what is actually my sleeping
problem is my problem that i have
difficulty falling asleep is my problem
that i have difficulty staying asleep is
my problem that i have difficulty waking
up is my problem that i feel tired
during the day
and be a little bit careful and be
critical and this is where you want to
like measure stuff right so people will
say oh my problem is that i get three
hours of sleep a night but if you
actually use a sleep diary what you will
discover you will uncover the sleep
misperception which is that you actually
fall asleep around 11
and then you may have opened your eyes
briefly at like two in the morning and
then you actually get out of bed at
seven and you may discover that
you're actually sleeping a normal amount
and then that should trigger something
really interesting because now you know
okay so there's something else going on
i'm actually sleeping eight hours a day
so components of a sleep diary which
will try to put together something some
kind of like worksheet or something for
y'all
but what time do you fall asleep
what time do you wake up
how rested do you feel
on a scale of one to ten
right so do this every day for a month
other things you can do is like how um
yeah so other things that i would add is
like what is your technology use
before bed
um
what
was
your
bedtime
routine
what was
caffeine
alcohol
marijuana intake like that day
right so like what did you do in the
four hours before bed
um
any particular sources of stress that
day
right so you should start like
collecting data over time
there are other things that we'll we'll
add to the sleep diary we'll try to put
something together for y'all that's
pretty comprehensive but you want to
check this stuff every single day right
you can even
include some stuff about dreams if you
want to but we'll get to that in a
second
so you th this is where you need to
collect really really high quality
information
so that you can make a targeted
intervention that will work for you
okay so sleep diary is really important
next thing okay so now just general
solutions so the first thing is time
outdoors
so every day you should spend at least
one hour outside if you can
okay so like this is the biggest problem
that i see with the gaming generation is
like we live in a cube
right especially if we're like really
hardcore gamers or like it doesn't you
don't have to be a hardcore gamer
especially during coven we wake up
we stay indoors
we
let's say we shower let's say i'm like a
generally healthy person during covet
right i wake up i shower i eat some
breakfast i sit down i work for eight
hours remotely
i take a break
i watch some tv while i have a late
lunch
right because like i'm not gonna just
sit there and eat my food i'm gonna have
some kind of technology while i'm doing
it i'm going to like watch something or
listen to something or whatever
and then i'm going to like log on with
my friends and i'm going to game for a
couple of hours and i'm going to wrap up
the day with some netflix
and then watch youtube videos on my
phone before i go to sleep
right so i've just been in this damn
cube the whole time so i have no outdoor
stuff so then what what does that mean
for my sleep
how does my body know that it's bedtime
it has no idea
how does it know when it's a daytime it
has no idea
it's not seeing any horizons which is
really important
actually for your eyes and stuff like
that too it's not getting exposed to a
large amount of light
right it's just the same damn
even walls
even windows maybe you get a little bit
of light
even light from our computer screen so
it's getting the same stimulus
all day long
and all night long there isn't a
difference in the kind of stimulus it
gets so it gets it it gets confused from
a circadian rhythm
so i know it's kind of weird but go
outside
during the day
and
at dusk
if you can this is ideal this is huge
okay
so this will start using a lot of good
like light
information
like your body you'll be sending all
kinds of signals to your body and there
are all kinds of mechanisms i haven't
even touched on so for example you will
produce
vitamin d
which in turn will decrease your
depression
which in turn
will move you in this direction cool
right so spend some time outdoors
next thing
structured bedtime routine
we are creatures of habit our brain
likes habit who here has to concentrate
every time they brush their teeth no you
don't need to concentrate anymore your
brain is formed a habit
help your habit work for you okay so
develop a bedtime routine so for two
hours before bed no screens
this is so hard oh my god dr k
how am i supposed to not use a screen
before bed it's impossible
couple of really good rules no phones in
bed
also applies to tablets
switches
laptops just no phones in bed
right that's hard dr k
i understand that it's hard it's just
you need to decide
what do you prefer
do you would you rather have your phone
in bed or would you rather have a good
night's sleep you have a choice
i'm not saying you have to do it i'm
just saying if you want a good night's
sleep you start with no phones in bed
this is where i'm going to help you all
out a little bit i'm not going to just
leave you with that decision all on your
own so i think this is where the biggest
challenge that we face
is that for the two hours before bed we
don't know what to do
right it's like if i'm not on my phone
because if you think about like when do
you pull out your phone you pull out
your phone during periods of boredom or
transitions when there's nothing else
going on you pull out your phone if
you're in a transition point you pull
out your phone if you're waiting for
your friend to pick you up and they're
gonna be there in five minutes and
you're ready what are you gonna do in
those five minutes you're going to pull
out your damn phone
right you're not going to sit there
you're going to pull out your phone
toilets transitions
right that's when we use our phone
the problem is that once you start
scrolling it's going to inhibit your
melatonin production
right so screens
inhibit melatonin
and are also going to
activate mental function
so this is what i want you all to
understand about your brain
you know how you don't cook food and put
it straight into the fridge what do you
do with food before you stick it in the
fridge
you got to let it come to room temp you
got to let it cool down
so your brain needs a cool down time so
that doesn't mean be inactive that means
don't do some kind of hyper stimulating
dopaminergic activity let it come to
room temperature before you you put it
to sleep that's what you need to do with
your brain okay
so screens are really really problematic
because the reason they're so damn
addictive and this is the way that
they're designed
is to stimulate the brain and keep it
engaged so it's the very opposite it's
like the you know the the
like all these apps and stuff are like
microwaves for your brain like they're
just gonna heat it up
like if you if you browse reddit for
example or twitter like they're gonna
there's gonna be a lot of like sexist
like political meme-ish
anti-blizzard anti-ea anti-work
anti-like climate change anti-liberal
antifa like so there's gonna be some
kind of crap that's gonna amp you up
right i'm not trying to place a value
judgment on any of it i'm not saying any
of it is right or wrong that's for other
people to decide i'm ignorant to that
stuff all i'm saying is that all that
stuff is gonna have you
like being
activated
okay
so
this is why you need to stay away from
screens so then the question is okay dr
k what should i do instead of
the screens and this is beautiful this
is like the most op move
all of the crap that you should be doing
anyway
right so if you procrastinate to do
things because you're xyz that is the
stuff that you should do for two hours
before bed so i like to the best one to
start with for me is grocery shopping i
will go grocery shopping at like 9 p.m
at night
okay so it gets me out of the house i'm
away from a screen i do my grocery
shopping then i've got groceries for
tomorrow so that's a win
i also clean before bed really fantastic
cleans out the mind
should the
this is in dr k's guide which in turn
will reduce your stress
reduce your anxiety
and target falling asleep
easy champ
right so cleaning and you have the bonus
of like having a you know clean dishes
you have the bonus of like not having a
messy place
so we're gonna take this goal that you
have set for yourself
and it's very hard for you to do and
we're gonna leverage that goal to help
you sleep every single day
okay you can also do things like sort
through the mail
i do all kinds of like random stuff okay
exercise yoga
meditation
okay and then some people say but i
thought you weren't supposed to exercise
before bed
and that's where like yeah generally
speaking if you look at population
studies it is more advantageous to
exercise earlier in the day for the
average person
but if you're like me you can exercise
for before bed and then like if you do
like two hours before bed you feel super
tired and like really good at night and
it's very easy to sleep
okay you can also do something like take
a bath so there's some physiologic stuff
here
where
i'm just trying to figure out if i want
to go into this
so when you take a hot bath you get a
lot of vasodila peripheral vasodilation
and then after the bath
you get alterations
in blood vessels
that make you sleepy
i'm not going to go into more detail but
not here but there's a lot that goes on
there right so you can use like
physiology there too
okay other advantage other things that
you can do so if you're bored right so
i'd say audio stuff is totally fine
physical books totally fine
be careful about what you read but
generally speaking like i'll listen to
like spirituality lectures and podcasts
and like stuff that's like interesting
and that like i'm glad the next day that
i learned something but it's not so
intellectually stimulating like i would
not read like a horror novel before bed
right unless that works for you i mean
it may work for you
but you can like all that stuff that you
want to learn like you know you want to
read more nonfiction you want to like
learn more about stoicism get yourself
an audio book and just listen to it in
bed okay
um we'll talk a little bit about
meditation in a second
and then uh
last thing is food
okay
so here's our tip
for eating
so here is the diet that i would
recommend for the average person who
wants to use that insulin spike in their
favor
so i'd say start
breakfast
with something like oatmeal
high fiber
high satiety
low calorie
food
okay
so if you don't do this
you will have a huge lunch
okay so we don't want a huge lunch we
want some kind of high fiber high
satiety like
pile of stuff in your stomach so that
you feel kind of full
you need to eat a pre-emptive lunch
so if you wait
too long
this calorie deficit which you've
already built up
is going to cause you to crave really
unhealthy food so you want to have like
a gigantic pile of oatmeal at like 8 a.m
with berries
and then you want to fix yourself some
kind of like sandwich or something like
even before you get hungry like 11 30
eat a sandwich or something not too
calorie dense
but you want to avoid being super super
hungry at 11 30
or at noon actually so you got to eat
early okay
then what's going to happen when evening
rolls around like when 6 pm
7 p.m rolls around you're gonna be
famished because you're like kind of
calorie deficit for the day and then i
want you to eat whatever the hell you
want
so go to town on the burrito
okay
hit that food coma veg out for a little
bit go through your bedtime routine and
then just pass the out
okay this is really really really
important okay
so there's an important point so a lot
of people say i do bodybuilding what
about this what about gaining weight
it takes about three days to reset your
sleep schedule so all this stuff you can
start to adjust these things but to
reset your sleep schedule all it takes
is three days
generally speaking so it's okay to do
this for three days and then you can
adopt healthier eating habits afterward
because then you've got other stuff
going for you right now your circadian
rhythm after three days your circadian
rhythm is adjusted it's gonna be easy
for you to fall asleep at 10 pm so you
don't need the burrito to get you into
the coma right at that point this stuff
will be enough
okay so these are general tips for sleep
okay
other things to remember
so last point that i'll kind of share is
that generally speaking it is easier to
wake up when you're tired than it is to
go to bed when you're not
okay
so
this may not apply to some of y'all so
if you have a problem with this phase
of sleep maybe this is not true for you
but generally speaking i think like
physiologically it's like easier to wake
up in the middle of the night if your
house is on fire than it is to like go
to sleep you know
if you're
fully awake
so our we have more mechanisms that can
increase wakefulness than we do that can
increase sleepiness
so if you want to reset your sleep
schedule what it takes is three days
of waking up on time
and
if you guys just want one tip bit of
advice being
a zombie
you will be a zombie don't drink
caffeine you're just gonna be a zombie
all day long you're gonna feel terrible
you're not gonna be able to do anything
you're gonna be unproductive you're
going to be kind of moody irritable like
it's just going to feel like you're
you're like lagging in real life
you're like playing real life on ping
that's what it's going to feel like
and then sleep will feel like a relief
next day you're gonna wake up
you're gonna be a zombie you're gonna do
that three days in a row
by the end of it you'll feel amazing
you'll have detox off of caffeine
you may have even detoxed off with some
of that dopamine too
and your sleep your circadian rhythm
will be reset and then you'll be like
golden
okay you just have to understand that
you have to like you're gonna be a
zombie for a while okay
so at this point we're an hour and a
half in and i have not even gotten to
the three specifics so i think we're
gonna save that for another day
so what we'll have maybe next time is
specific strategies
for if you have trouble falling asleep
staying asleep
and waking up
right so how can we look at
please today
okay we can do it today that means
that's all we're gonna do today i gotta
i gotta check
okay today okay
so good
okay
okay finish today that's all we're going
to do today then
because i did what i normally do so
we're like this is like dude this is a
90 minute lecture
folks you all get that like we're
already 90 minutes in and by the way
i've done like 12 hour seminars on sleep
so there's just we're just scratching
the surface like there's so much to
understand about this
that's all
applicable too it's not just like
academic
like here's what we like there's like
there's so many different things
so one tip that i we haven't even talked
about which is huge
is you remember this this rem cycle
business
right so you have
you have sleep cycles where you start
here and then you end here
so if you wake up here
you'll feel groggy
but if you wake up here you'll feel
rested
and this is if you for example sleep for
two hours and wake up here you will feel
rested if you sleep for eight hours and
wake up here you'll feel groggy so
understanding where you are in your
sleep cycle when you wake up is critical
so this is why you know sometimes you
take a nap
and like you wake up feeling way more
tired than when you went to bed and
sometimes you take a nap and it's like
you feel amazing
and you're like wait but why is that
like i only slept for a half an hour or
45 minutes and i feel amazing and other
times it's like i slept for three hours
and i feel like a zombie like i don't
understand what's going on it's because
of when you wake up during this this
cycle and so even understanding things
to that specificity will control
how easy it is to wake up because you
have to wake up at the right time of
your sleep cycle
okay
okay strategies
all right
so difficulty falling asleep
so the first thing to understand
is that according to ayurveda which by
the way i know we've had some people who
were
uh skeptical of irvada which is totally
fine um i'm still amalgamating different
kinds of evidence that i will present to
y'all and hopefully y'all will be
convinced
i am um
i'm i'm convinced that ayurveda is very
helpful from a clinical standpoint
precisely because of things like this so
if you guys like think this is pretty
cool and no one else talks about it this
way
this kind of thinking essentially comes
from ayurveda
this idea that insomnia is not
homogeneous and affects different people
in different ways is like a
fundamentally ayurvedic concept and you
may say but that's a fundamentally human
concept but that's not how western
medicine really thinks about it right
because
a medical doctor will diagnose you with
insomnia like they'll just diagnose you
with that and they'll kind of like be
done with it
right so falling asleep first of all to
understand from an ayurvedic perspective
is a bit the problem and if you guys
don't understand what that means
go watch dr k's guide and go look at the
ir by the stuff because there's like two
or three hours about that okay
so it's a fit then balance so pithas
their minds are very active their minds
are like fire they can't let things go
they have trouble cooling down before we
put the food in the fridge
right and so they have difficulty
falling asleep they will hold on
oftentimes
to a few thoughts
and these thoughts prevent them from
sleeping
okay
so if you have trouble falling asleep
first thing to understand is that it may
be a fit the issue and if you balance
your pitta it should get better
we'll talk a little bit more about that
in a second
second thing you should ask yourself is
if you're having trouble staying asleep
here's the next question you should ask
yourself
have i been
awake for
16 hours
if the answer to that question is no
your goal tomorrow is to go to sleep at
the same time and have that turn that
question into a yes
okay so
the solution to that is
wake up earlier
right because remember your metabolic
substrates haven't built up to help you
fall asleep if you haven't been awake
for 16 hours so your answer is to wake
up earlier
by the way you may be a zombie
gg just let your circadian rhythm
balance after three days it's gonna be
tough
right but this is what you're gonna need
to do the good news is even after one
day you may start to feel a little bit
better okay
so the next thing to think a little bit
about
is your let me just make sure
um okay yeah so next thing to think
about is does your body
know
it is time to sleep
and you may ask
me
dr k how does my body know whether it is
time to sleep or not and this is where
like we talked about this right what are
the ways in which your body knows that
it's been time to sleep so we've talked
about being awake for 16 hours
what has your light exposure been like
have you been stuck in a room all day
because if the answer to that question
is yes your body is really confused
what's your technology use like
and if your body is like oh if you've
been like sitting in a room without
windows for the last
16 hours and there's been a constant
stream of like computer monitor light or
tv screen light on you then your body
has no idea it's time to sleep and it's
gonna get confused it's gonna be hard to
fall asleep okay
next thing is
stress and anxiety
do you have stress do you have anxiety
what are you stressed out about what are
you anxious about this is where things
get a little bit complicated so you can
you know depending on how bad things are
you can work with a therapist
you can work with a coach
you can also just like
introspect
process
we touch on this all through the rest of
our stuff so there's a lot of stuff
about this in dr k's guide but i can't
go into like how to fix stress or
anxiety like
in five minutes right it's just not that
simple
but the truth is that if you're having
trouble falling asleep and you're in a
stressful state
that has high cortisol
this is going to be activating your raf
and is going to make it hard for you to
fall asleep and make you a light sleeper
so you have to deal with this stuff
there are a couple of other specific
practices so the meditative rewind
practice which is in the guide
is very effective for this
yoga nidra
is also very effective for this both
those are in the guide we're going to
teach you guys a different meditation
today
okay
so you have to deal with your stress and
anxiety and then the last thing
is
diet optimization for this so remember
since it's a bit the problem
what we really want to do is focus on
like cooling kind of heavy
foods so you know if you eat yogurt
with fruit
drizzle
maple syrup
before bed this should be your dessert
right we're gonna get some good
protein in there
some good antioxidants
get some vitamin c
get some
[Music]
other stuff fiber
right it's going to taste yummy because
there's a little bit of maple syrup in
there now technically ayurveda says you
shouldn't mix fruit in yogurt you
shouldn't mix dairy and and fruit but
we'll step away for that for a second
um and if eating them together causes
you a lot of indigestion and interferes
with your sleep then don't do it but i
think this is like a really good kind of
dietary thing that you can have it'll
have like some density to it it'll be
like somewhat satisfying and it'll
actually be quite healthy okay
so
this is what to do if you have trouble
falling asleep okay so let's recap it's
a bit then balance so your mind will be
holding on to a few thoughts and keeping
you from sleeping
so there's
techniques and stuff around that as well
but you know the
the main thing is going to be first of
all have you been awake for 16 hours
second thing is going to be to make sure
that your body knows that it's time to
sleep and how does the body know that
it's time to sleep it has to do with
your light exposure for the day and your
technology exposure for the day
third thing to think a little bit about
is just your stress and anxiety level
and like as long as those are present
you have to understand that that is
going to lead to a clinical impact
physiologic impact on your sleep so you
can try to do all kinds of other stuff
take supplements or whatever but if you
really want to be like conquer insomnia
and sleep like a baby this must be dealt
with and oh my goodness dr k that means
that i can't fix it tonight yes that is
correct unfortunately you cannot fix
sleep necessarily in one day sometimes
it takes weeks if not months the upside
is that once you learn how to do this
and you process these problems you could
be sleeping like a baby for the next
five years
right and this is like this is the
problem with sort of like the
the
supplement industry is like they're not
gonna tell you that right like they're
like everyone out there is looking for
an easy fix to sleep
and so the market provides them with the
illusion of an easy fix
that's scientifically backed for good
reason
and then people are just
like then the problem propagates right
and it's because all we all want an easy
solution they're like i just want to
sleep tonight
and the truth is that if you want to
consistently have good sleep day after
day after day after day it's not going
to be an easy fix
unless you've got sleep apnea in which
you guys get yourself a sleep ap
cpap it'll revolutionize your life
okay
all right for staying asleep
this
is a vata imbalance
right so restlessness
about that problems
this is also where we see things like
ptsd manifest right so you're gonna get
nightmares
so the other way to think about it is
nightmares will not affect falling
asleep or waking up but they will affect
the sleep in the middle so there's like
early sleep mid sleep late sleep
okay
so key things to start with what's your
caffeine intake
also true for falling asleep especially
if you have had caffeine
um
so other vata things to be aware of is
technology use
so this isn't just technology used two
hours before bed although that'll
definitely engage the melatonin circuits
and things like that
but technology used throughout the day
so if you just overall reduce your
technology use and this is especially
phone usage in transition points it will
help you sleep i know it sounds crazy
um
so this is another really important
thing is routine before bed
so you really want to not so the the
how can i say this so for people who
have trouble falling asleep
sometimes what ends up happening is that
they basically the fatigue
gets so bad that it overcomes
their inability to fall asleep
right and if you fall asleep that way
your sleep is going to be disturbed
because your mind is not ready for sleep
it's like it doesn't want to sleep but
the fatigue overpowers it and then
you're kind of like left with a very
unrestful sleep afterward if that makes
sense
so what you want to do is is really be
careful about the routine before bed in
the cool down period because you want to
let your body prepare for a long period
of rest so cool down period becomes
really really important a couple of
other tips here so weighted blanket
can be super super op so sometimes vatas
really really like weighted blankets if
you also have anxiety so there have been
clinical studies that show that weighted
blankets will actually help people with
anxiety sleep better so if you want to
use some device or tool to help you
sleep stay asleep
another interesting question that i'll
sometimes ask people
when i'm deciding whether to recommend a
weighted blanket is i will ask them
when you were a baby did you need to be
tightly swaddled to sleep
and so they'll ask their parents and
what i've anecdotal but i've seen an
anecdotal correlation with like how
swaddled you needed to be to sleep
properly and how much you'll respond to
a weighted blanket there's all kinds of
physiologic mechanisms psychological
mechanisms things like that that are
involved with weighted blankets
um so you can even ask your parents did
i need to be like tightly swaddled or
what
uh
okay
so
yeah so temperature control is also
really important
for the maintenance of sleep
so you may need to adjust your
temperature
um
[Music]
yeah another thing you can do to fall
asleep so we mentioned a couple of these
things like audio books and stuff like
that
okay
next thing is tired in the am
okay so if you're tired in the morning
this is a kapha imbalance
or difficulty waking up
okay
so you want to use kapha alleviating
diets right so you want to eat food that
is
light dry
and sour right the other way to kind of
think about that is if you eat lightly
the night before
we're gonna let's let's kind of reverse
the process and think about physiology
so if i don't have a burrito before bed
what's gonna happen right so i'm so if i
have a burrito before bed
let's just look at the burrito
if i eat a burrito
my blood sugar
so blood sugar is going to be white
is going to go up
and then fall over the course of the
night okay
and then when i i'm going to make
something called glycogen which is my
sugar stores
so my sugar stores will also like
be high until i'm low right
and so like at this point
when i wake up let's say this is 8 a.m
i'm gonna have a lot of glycogen
so i'm not going to be
starving at all
so if i eat lightly instead
what's going to happen let's say i eat
lightly
and then i don't have any insulin spike
so let's take the non-burrito
let's say light meal before bed
my blood sugar basically stays
the new blood the new glucose that i'm
adding to the system stays low
and my my glycogen which is high is
going to decrease over the course of the
night
and then at 8 am
i'm a
hungry so it'll be easier to wake up
if you eat lightly right so glycogen
stores last for about eight hours
and so eight hours after your
glycogen starts being broken down you
will start to feel hungry and you want
to use that hunger to make help yourself
wake up
so other tips that you want to do
okay so
eat lightly
ideally not at all
before bed
okay
next thing that you want to do
no blinds so try to sleep in a room that
gets sunlight so i don't know if y'all
have ever had this annoying experience
have you ever had like an experience
where the sun is right in your eyes when
you're trying to sleep because of like
some place that you're sleeping it's
super super uncomfortable so no blinds
let that sunlight hit you in the face
and wake you up
son wakes you up
let it wake you up that's what it's
there for
it's annoying in your eyes
right and so it's kind of interesting
because just think about this for a
second
your eyes could have evolved to be
thicker
you all get that your eyes could have
evolved to be blackout curtains that are
completely able to black out the sun but
they evolved to be a certain degree of
transparency so that your body knows
when to wake up when the sunlight is in
your eyes
that's the way that they were made it's
supposed to wake you up
and so when the sunlight flashes in your
eyes
right you don't look at the sun just
keep keep your eyes closed it'll
turn off melatonin production and you'll
start to wake up
it's exactly like how it's supposed to
happen and if you use blackout curtains
or you're in a room with no natural
sunlight it's gonna be hard to wake up
okay
so
other thing is that
i know it's kind of kind of weird but
you want to try to wake up early
so you can go to bed early
which in turn means that you're you'll
start to reduce your adenosine
at let's say 9 pm
which will in turn allow you to wake up
very naturally because then your
metabolic like triggers are also going
to be active and they'll help you wake
up at like
five in the morning
other other tip
this is a key key
key tip
if you are having trouble waking up in
the morning so let's say you have
trouble at 7am
you don't need to sleep in you need to
wake up earlier so try to wake up at 5am
you will be amazed some percentage of
you will find it way easier to wake up
at 5 a.m than you will at 7 a.m so
there's circadian rhythm factors here
there's also
sleep cycle factors here
right when i say sleep cycle factors i'm
talking about this stuff
where's the sleep cycle
i'm yeah
right so like 8 am
eight a.m maybe here
and like
five a.m maybe here right between your
sleep cycles where it's easy to wake up
so i know it's kind of weird because
people were asking how do you wake up
in between your cycles and some of it is
circadian
so it's like hard like it's very
individualized
but oftentimes if you have trouble
waking up in the morning the solution is
to not sleep in but actually try to wake
up earlier and you will be stunned at
how easy it is to wake up at 5am instead
of 7am
there's also a lot of evolutionary
biology about this which is that
so if we look at
like for example
visual acuity
is highest
for mammals
at dawn
and dusk
and why is that it's because we're
designed to be awake so you have
millions or billions of your hundreds of
millions of years of evolution that is
trying to get you up at like five in the
morning around the time of dawn
and so i would adjust your psych like
like try to wake up even earlier like if
you have if you if you keep on hitting
the snooze button at 7 00 am try waking
up at five you'll be very very surprised
okay
um and so that's what i would recommend
for waking up
okay
if you have difficulty waking up
all right to wrap up we're gonna do
a meditation
um the reason we're gonna do this
meditation is
let me think about how to say this
so there's gonna be a different kind of
meditation but i want it to be something
that can help you fall asleep and can be
done easily if you wake up in the middle
of the night
so the first thing is we have three
really really good meditations
for sleep in dr k's guide we're not
going to go into those today
because they're there and that's why
they're there
right so yoga nidra medical rewind i
mean uh
meditative rewind practice
and catching the moment of sleep i think
are three really really good meditations
catching the moment of sleep meditation
is really good for someone who has a
very inquisitive active mind
and needs to focus it before bed
um
and
yoga nidra is like generally good for
cool downing uh period and meditative
rewind practice is really really good
for people who have like accumulated a
lot of emotion or had a rough day
so what i'm gonna teach y'all today is
actually uh
meditative practice
let me think about how to
say this
around darkness okay
so this is gonna fall into the category
of being like
meditations about the self too
meditations kind of around shunya
but it's a meditation that you can do
basically in the dark
and so essentially what we're going to
do i'm going to walk you all through it
but you can do this with your eyes open
if it's very dark outside or you can do
it with your eyes closed
and we're going to kind of notice
the limit
uh how can i say this
we're actually going to notice the lack
of limit
of the darkness that we experience on
the inside so if i close my eyes
i'm going to have a sense of space
which is determined by my physical body
but in my mind
i'm gonna have blackness
but if you really pay attention
it's gonna you're gonna think originally
that the darkness is limited or that the
darkness starts somewhere or ends
somewhere but really what you're going
to do is start to realize that what you
experience as darkness
has no actual limits and it extends
forever which is sort of terrifying and
sort of cool and then who are you in
that business it's kind of hard to
describe it y'all hopefully you'll get
it okay
and so this is something that you can
also kind of
swim into
in the middle of the night if you wake
up
okay
so
it it sounds terrifying but that's
because you haven't experienced it it's
actually incredibly peaceful
all right so we're going to start by
sitting up straight and closing our eyes
i gotta drink something
also spill
okay
let's just kind of breathe in and out
for me i need to cool down
i've been talking a lot
for those of you who have been listening
maybe you're feeling kind of sluggish
so let the breath start
by balancing where you are
if you feel sluggish let the breath
energize you big deep inhalation
and breathe out
let it energize you
[Music]
and out
third breath big deep breath
you may feel a little bit light-headed
or energized
but certainly not sluggish
not weighed down
and on the flip side if you feel like
you need to calm down
what we're going to do is
brief inhalation
and really stretch out that exhalation
so breathe in
and breathe out
so maybe two three second inhalation
seven eight nine second exhalation
another relatively quick inhalation
slow slow exhalation
and now let your breath guide you
it will turn you into the direction that
you need to go
you may notice a relatively even deep
slow breath now
and so we're gonna sit in that for about
a minute
if you feel like you might get
distracted
you can just appreciate
how altering the breath artificially
leads to an equilibriation
or the relationship between your breath
and your mind
try to notice the nuances or subtleties
the feeling of the breath as it is in in
you right now
and now i want you to notice
the blackness of your mind
you may kind of notice that visually you
are seeing black
and you may begin by being anchored to
your body
you may notice the limits of your body
in space
you may notice that the blackness that
you see is on your eyelids alone
and now start to move beyond your
eyelids
and notice that the black extends beyond
them
if you are anchored too much in the body
then notice the edge of your knees
the top of your head
and notice how you can feel nothing
beyond that
now follow that nothingness out as far
as it'll go
notice how tiny you truly are
how small your body feels
in the vast emptiness
and see how even within you
within the limits of your body
there's blackness
it's almost as if the border of your
body
is a paper thin screen
between
the void within you
and the never-ending void outside of you
and now sit in one of those two places
and begin to realize that they are one
and the same
that the quality of the emptiness within
you
is the same as the quality of the
emptiness beyond your body
and take all of your cares and worries
your concerns and your fears
your regrets and your anxieties
and notice how tall how tiny they are
how insignificant
compared to the vast beyond
and the well within you
a deep deep well of blackness
and notice yourself in this moment
almost floating
the energy
suffusing your body
and find peace
swim in the ocean of nothing
let it wash over you
sweeping all of your worries away
and now tell yourself
it is time to sleep
or time to work
or time to wake up
and from this place
you can send it intention towards your
conscious mind whatever it is
and that when you break from this place
which is already fading
notice how it's fading already
that this lingering thought will be
there
and whatever intention you have set
yourself
will come to be
take a deep breath
and return yourself to the
world or drift yourself to sleep
whatever you choose
and come on back
you